Make arrow functions page less repetitive (#22103)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/javascript/reference/functions/arrow_functions/index.md

{{jsSidebar("Functions")}}

An **arrow function expression** is a compact alternative to a traditional [function expression](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/function), with some semantic differences and deliberate limitations in usage:

- Arrow functions don't have their own bindings to [`this`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/this), [`arguments`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/arguments), or [`super`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/super), and should not be used as [methods](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Method).
- Arrow functions cannot be used as [constructors](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Constructor). Calling them with [`new`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/new) throws a {{jsxref("TypeError")}}. They also don't have access to the [`new.target`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/new.target) keyword.

> - Arrow functions cannot use [`yield`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/yield) within its body and cannot be created as generator functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Arrow functions cannot use [`yield`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/yield) within their body and cannot be created as generator functions.
```

{{EmbedInteractiveExample("pages/js/functions-arrow.html")}}

## Syntax

```js-nolint
param => expression
(param) => expression
(param1, paramN) => expression

param => {
  statements
}

> (param1, paramN) => {

Reviewer: Arguably a space here to match line 30, or removal of the space at line 30 (consistency). I do like the spacing.

  statements
}
```

> [Rest parameters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/rest_parameters), [default parameters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Default_parameters), and [destructuring](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment) within params are supported, and always require parentheses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Rest parameters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/rest_parameters), [default parameters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Default_parameters), and [destructuring assignment](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment) within params are supported, and always require parentheses:
```

Author: It's not actually "assignment"—FWIW I don't like that page's title. "Destructuring" is a syntax that can be used in places other than assignment, such as here, where it's simply a destructured parameter.

Reviewer: Fair enough. Thanks.

// 2. Remove the body braces and word "return" — the return is implied.
(a) => a + 100;

// 3. Remove the parameter parentheses
a => a + 100;
```

> > **Note:** Traditional function expressions and arrow functions have more differences than their syntax. We will introduce other differences in the next few subsections.

Reviewer: IMO this information should go right at the end or right at the start - it interrupts the flow here to no value.

In the example above, both the parentheses around the parameter and the braces around the function body may be omitted. However, they can only be omitted in certain cases.

The parentheses can only be omitted if the function has a single simple parameter. If it has multiple parameters, no parameters, or default, destructured, or rest parameters, the parentheses around the parameter list are required.

```js
// Traditional anonymous function
(function (a, b) {
  return a + b + 100;
});

// Arrow function
(a, b) => a + b + 100;

const a = 4;
const b = 2;

// Traditional anonymous function (no parameters)
(function() {
  return a + b + 100;
});

// Arrow function (no arguments)
() => a + b + 100;
```

> The braces can only be omitted if the function directly returns an expression. If the body has additional lines of processing, the braces are required — and so is the `return` keyword. Arrow functions do not magically guess what or when you want to return.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The braces can only be omitted if the function directly returns an expression. If the body has additional lines of processing, the braces are required — and so is the `return` keyword. Arrow functions cannot guess what or when you want to return.
```

// 2. Remove the body braces and word "return" — the return is implied.
(a) => a + 100;

// 3. Remove the parameter parentheses
a => a + 100;
```

> **Note:** Traditional function expressions and arrow functions have more differences than their syntax. We will introduce other differences in the next few subsections.

> In the example above, both the parentheses around the parameter and the braces around the function body may be omitted. However, they can only be omitted in certain cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parentheses around the parameter and the braces around the function body may only be omitted, as shown above, in certain cases.
```

Author: The suggested sentence took me twice to parse, because the first time I read "as shown above" as meaning "the above shows how it can only be omitted in certain cases", which it doesn't. I think a bit of repetition here makes the intent clearer.

Reviewer: Your call!

const bob2 = (a) => a + 100;
```

### Function body

Arrow functions can have either a _concise body_ or the usual _block body_.

> In a concise body, only an expression is specified, which becomes the implicit return value. In a block body, you must use an explicit `return` statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a concise body, only a single expression is specified, which becomes the implicit return value. In a block body, you must use an explicit `return` statement.
```

```js
const func = (x) => x * x;
// concise body syntax, implied "return"

const func2 = (x, y) => {
  return x + y;
};
// with block body, explicit "return" needed
```

Returning object literals using the concise body syntax `(params) => { object: literal }` does not work as expected.

```js example-bad
const func = () => { foo: 1 };
// Calling func() returns undefined!

const func2 = () => { foo: function () {} };
// SyntaxError: function statement requires a name

const func3 = () => { foo() {} };
// SyntaxError: Unexpected token '{'
```

> This is because JavaScript only sees the arrow function as having a concise body if the token following the arrow is not a left brace, so the code inside braces ({}) is parsed as a sequence of statements, where `foo` is a [label](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/label, not a key in an object literal.

Author: ```suggestion
This is because JavaScript only sees the arrow function as having a concise body if the token following the arrow is not a left brace, so the code inside braces ({}) is parsed as a sequence of statements, where `foo` is a [label](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/label), not a key in an object literal.
```

> This is because JavaScript only sees the arrow function as having a concise body if the token following the arrow is not a left brace, so the code inside braces ({}) is parsed as a sequence of statements (i.e. `foo` is treated like a [label](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/label), not a key in an object literal).

Reviewer: Apparently screen readers hate i.e., e.g., and so on. So where possible you should use words instead. Yes, I am not consistent on this when reviewing or writing - it seems unnatural to me to add words to replace a useful shorthand.

```suggestion
This is because JavaScript only sees the arrow function as having a concise body if the token following the arrow is not a left brace, so the code inside braces ({}) is parsed as a sequence of statements (in other words `foo` is treated like a [label](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/label), not a key in an object literal).
```

Author: 🤔, I don't like this change either. But in this case, we can actually get rid of "i.e." altogether.

```suggestion
This is because JavaScript only sees the arrow function as having a concise body if the token following the arrow is not a left brace, so the code inside braces ({}) is parsed as a sequence of statements, where `foo` is a [label](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/label, not a key in an object literal.
```

To fix this, wrap the object literal in parentheses:

```js example-good
const func = () => ({ foo: 1 });
```

> ### Cannot be used as methods

Reviewer: Complete nit, but the partial sentences feel wrong. You can ignore if you like. 

```suggestion
### Arrow functions cannot be used as methods
```

Author: Yeah, I prefer them to be short in this case, since "arrow functions" is repeated a lot between these titles.

Reviewer: @Josh-Cena Though, here you say "cannot" and below you say "arrow function expressions are best suited for non-method functions" - which is it?

Author: It's "cannot" because it violates the definition of methods. Let's change the text below.

> Arrow function expressions should be used for non-method functions because arrow functions do not have their own `this`. Let's see what happens when we try to use them as methods:

Reviewer: This isn't quite right - we still want to say should not be used for methods. So either 

```suggestion
Arrow function expressions should not be used as methods because they do not have their own `this`. Let's see what happens when we try to use them as methods:
```

Reviewer: or
```suggestion
Arrow function expressions should only be used for non-method functions because they do not have their own `this`. Let's see what happens when we try to use them as methods:
```

> As stated previously, arrow function expressions are best suited for non-method functions, because arrow functions do not have their own `this`. Let's see what happens when we try to use them as methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arrow function expressions are best suited for non-method functions, because arrow functions do not have their own `this`. Let's see what happens when we try to use them as methods:
```

Author: ```suggestion
Arrow function expressions should be used for non-method functions because arrow functions do not have their own `this`. Let's see what happens when we try to use them as methods:
```

foo(3); // 3 + 3 = 6
```

> > **Note:** You cannot declare a variable called `arguments` in [strict mode](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Strict_mode#making_eval_and_arguments_simpler), so the code above would be a syntax error. This makes the scoping effect of `arguments` much easier to comprehend.

Reviewer: FYI, I made this change.

const max = (a, b) => a > b ? a : b;

// Easy array filtering, mapping, etc.

> 

Reviewer: FYI, I removed this.

```js
const obj = {
  num: 100,
};

// Setting "num" on globalThis to show how it is NOT used.
globalThis.num = 42;

// A simple traditional function to operate on "this"
const add = function (a, b, c) {
  return this.num + a + b + c;
};

console.log(add.call(obj, 1, 2, 3)); // 106
console.log(add.apply(obj, [1, 2, 3])); // 106
const boundAdd = add.bind(obj);
console.log(boundAdd(1, 2, 3)); // 106
```

With arrow functions, since our `add` function is essentially created on the `globalThis` (global) scope, it will assume `this` is the `globalThis`.

```js
const obj = {
  num: 100,
};

// Setting "num" on globalThis to show how it gets picked up.
globalThis.num = 42;

// Arrow function
const add = (a, b, c) => this.num + a + b + c;

console.log(add.call(obj, 1, 2, 3)); // 48
console.log(add.apply(obj, [1, 2, 3])); // 48
const boundAdd = add.bind(obj);
console.log(boundAdd(1, 2, 3)); // 48
```

> Perhaps the greatest benefit of using arrow functions is with methods like {{domxref("setTimeout()")}} and {{domxref("EventTarget/addEventListener()", "EventTarget.prototype.addEventListener()")}} that usually require some kind of closure, `call()`, `apply()`, or `bind()` to ensure that the function is executed in the proper scope.

Reviewer: FYI only, the section below is really good. Sadly it does highlight to me that I really don't have a firm grasp on closures and scoping.

Author: It's still a bit "icky" to me, but I can't properly fix it without rewriting the `this` page first. I would revisit this section in the future.

Reviewer: That would be good :-). I'm a bit 80/20 rule on this stuff - its not wrong and it is much better, so get it in and iterate when it makes sense.

Author: Yeah I'm not going to wait on that! There's a lot to elaborate for advanced topics :)

> With traditional function expressions, code would have to be written like this:

Author: ```suggestion
With traditional function expressions, code like this does not work as expected:
```

> Previously, code would have to be written like this with traditional function expressions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With traditional function expressions, code would have to be written like this:
```
